feat(behaviors): Add macro support. (#1166)
zmkfirmware/zmk: docs/docs/behaviors/macros.md

---
title: Macro Behavior
sidebar_label: Macros
---

## Summary

The macro behavior allows configuring a list of other behaviors to invoke
when the macro is pressed, including support for completing part of the binding list
once the macro is released.

## Macro Definition

Each macro you want to use in your keymap gets defined first, then bound in your keymap.

A macro definition looks like:

```
/ {
    macros {
        zed_em_kay: zmk_macro {
        label = "ZMK_MAC";

>         compatible = "zmk,behavior-macro";

Reviewer: I've been looking at these instructions to make sure I understood how to define macros. For the most part they are clear, and I had no difficulty. A couple of questions, though:

1. Must this `compatible` line (and perhaps the following `#binding-cells` line) occur inside each particular macro, or can in be placed outside of the individual macros, but still under `macro { ... }` (as is true with combos)? That is, is the following permissible?---

        / {
            macros {
                compatible = "zmk,behavior-macro";
                #binding-cells = <0>;
                zed_em_kay: zmk_macro {
                    label = "ZMK_MAC";
                    bindings =
                        ...
                };
                kay_em_zed: kmz_macro {
                    label = "KMZ_MAC";
                    bindings =
                        ...
                };
            };
        };

2. I'm uncertain what the point of the `label` item is or whether it matters that it be assigned to anything in particular or just any unique string. (Does it have to be all caps, for example?) From the perspective of a user, that `label` item seems superfluous, and might just be made identical to the "node label".

Author: Thanks for reviewing!

1. Not easily. At a minimum, the `binding-cells` still needs to be on the node. The compatible we could *maybe* get away w/ moving. Let me ponder more.
2.The label needs to be unique, it's used internally by our Zephyr RTOS... But perhaps we could auto-generate it...

Author: Sadly, it really is required. We can definitely consider a C macro to simplify this.

Author: Hmm... Thoughts on using this macro to simplify defining them:

```
		ZMK_MACRO(
			dual_sequence_macro,
			wait-ms = <10>;
			bindings
				= <&macro_press &kp LALT>
				, <&macro_tap>
				, <&kp TAB>
				, <&macro_pause_for_release>
				, <&macro_release &kp LALT>
				;
		)
```

Author: @okke-formsma @joelspadin ^

Author: I haven't documented it yet, but I've added this macro now, if folks are happy with it, I'll add a note at the end of the docs w/ some examples of using the macro to simplify defining them.

Reviewer 2: As noted on Discord, I find it weird that it appears as if the first line is delimited with a comma but all others with semicolons. Maybe it would be less confusing if you formatted these like

```c
ZMK_MACRO(abc_macro,
    wait-ms = <10>;
    tap-ms = <20>;
    bindings = <&kp A &kp B &kp C>;
)
```
to differentiate the macro name from its contents?

Author: I updated these, and noted this in the docs covering this. Marking resolved.

            ;
        };
    };
};
```

:::note
The text before the colon (`:`) in the declaration of the macro node is the "node label", and is the text
used to reference the macro in your keymap
:::

The macro can then be bound in your keymap by referencing it by the label `&zed_em_kay`, e.g.:

```
        raise_layer {
            bindings = <&zed_em_kay>;
        };
```

### Bindings

Like [hold-taps](/docs/behaviors/hold-tap), macros are created by composing other behaviors, and any of those behaviors can
be added to the `bindings` list, e.g.:

```
bindings
    = <&to 1>
    , <&bl BL_ON>
    , <&kp Z &kp M &kp K &kp EXCLAMATION>
    ;
```

## Macro Controls

There are a set of special macro controls that can be included in the `bindings` list to modify the
way the macro is processed.

### Binding Activation Mode

Bindings in a macro are activated differently, depending on the current "activation mode" of the macro.

Available modes:

- Tap - The default mode; when in this mode, the macro will press, then release, each behavior in the `bindings` list. This mode is useful for
  basic keycode output to hosts, i.e. when activating a `&kp` behavior.

> - Press - In this mode, the macro processing will only trigger a press on the behaviors in the macro. This is useful for holding down modifiers for some duration of a macro, e.g. `&kp LALT`.

Reviewer 2: suggestion for consistency with above
```suggestion
- Press - In this mode, the macro will only trigger a press on each behavior in the `bindings` list. This is useful for holding down modifiers for some duration of a macro, e.g. `&kp LALT`.
```

> - Release - In this mode, the macro processing will only trigger a release on the behaviors in the macro. This is useful for releasing modifiers previously pressed earlier in the macro processing, e.g. `&kp LALT`.

Reviewer 2: suggestion for consistency with above
```suggestion
- Release - In this mode, the macro will only trigger a release on each behavior in the `bindings` list. This is useful for releasing modifiers previously pressed earlier in the macro, e.g. `&kp LALT`.
```

> To modify the activation mode, macro controls can be added at any point in the bindings list.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to consistently monospace "bindings"?
```suggestion
To modify the activation mode, macro controls can be added at any point in the `bindings` list.
```

- `&macro_tap`
- `&macro_press`
- `&macro_release`

A concrete example, used to hold a modifier, tap multiple keys, then release the modifier, would look like:

```
bindings
    = <&macro_press &kp LSHFT>
    , <&macro_tap &kp Z &kp M &kp K>
    , <&macro_release &kp LSHFT>
    ;
```

### Processing Continuation on Release

The macro can be paused so that only part of the `bindings` list is processed when the macro is pressed, and the remainder is processed once
the macro itself is released.

> To pause the macro until release, use `&macro_pause_for_release`, like in this example that will press a modifier and activate a layer when the macro is pressed, and once the macro is released, release the modifier and deactivate the layer by releasing the `&mo`:

Reviewer 3: code snippet shows `macro_wait_for_release`. Should this be `pause` or `wait`?

Author: Thanks, good catch.

> To pause the macro until release, use `&macro_pause_for_release`, like in this example that will press a modifier and activate a layer when the macro is pressed, and once the macro is released, release the modifier and deactivate the layer by releasing the `&mo`:

Reviewer 2: Feels a little bit like a run on sentence. Maybe split this up?
```suggestion
To pause the macro until release, use `&macro_pause_for_release`. For example, this macro will press a modifier and activate a layer when the macro is pressed. Once the macro is released, it will release the modifier and deactivate the layer by releasing the `&mo`:
```

```
bindings
	= <&macro_press &mo 1 &kp LSHFT>
	, <&macro_pause_for_release>
	, <&macro_release &mo 1 &kp LSHFT>
	;
```

### Wait Time

The wait time setting controls how long of a delay is introduced between behaviors in the `bindings` list. The initial wait time for a macro, 100ms by default, can
be set by assigning a value to the `wait-ms` property of the macro, e.g. `wait-ms = <20>;`. If you want to update the wait time at any
point in the macro bindings list, use `&macro_wait_time`, e.g. `&macro_wait_time 30`. A full example:

```
wait-ms = <10>;
bindings
    = <&kp F &kp A &kp S &kp T>
    , <&macro_wait_time 500>
    , <&kp S &kp L &kp O &kp W>
    ;
```

### Tap Time

The tap time setting controls how long a tapped behavior is held in the `bindings` list. The initial tap time for a macro, 100ms by default, can
be set by assigning a value to the `tap-ms` property of the macro, e.g. `tap-ms = <20>;`. If you want to update the tap time at any
point in a macro bindings list, use `&macro_tap_time`, e.g. `&macro_tap_time 30`. A full example:

```
bindings
    = <&macro_tap_time 10>

> 	, <&kp S &kp H &kp O &kp R &kp T>

Reviewer 2: Mixed tabs and spaces.

---
title: Macro Behavior
sidebar_label: Macros
---

## Summary

The macro behavior allows configuring a sequence of other behaviors to invoke
when the macro is pressed, including support for completing part of the sequence
once the macro is released.

## Macro Definition

Each macro you want to use in your keymap gets defined first, then bound in your keymap.

A macro definition looks like:

```
/ {
    behaviors {

>         alt_tab: alt_tab_macro {

Reviewer 2: Since I know this stuff was basically magic to me before I started to understand DeviceTree, it may be helpful to clarify somewhere (in a comment inline in the code?) that the part before the colon is the label you will use in keymap bindings, and the part after the colon doesn't matter as long as it's unique.

(That suggestion also applies to the other docs pages like hold-tap and mod-morph.)

			label = "ALT_TAB_MAC";
			compatible = "zmk,behavior-macro";
			#binding-cells = <0>;
			bindings
				= <&macro_press &kp LALT>
				, <&macro_tap>
				, <&kp TAB>
                , <&macro_pause_for_release>
				, <&macro_release &kp LSHFT>
				;
		};
    };
};
```

> The macro can then be bound in your keymap by referencing it by the label `&alt_tab`.

Reviewer 2: That macro is not quite the same as `&kp LA(TAB)` but also not a single-key "swapper" behavior. It is effectively `&kp LA(TAB)` when tapped, but it allows you to keep cycling forward by tapping Tab while holding the macro. On press it would cycle forward one window, then release Tab but not Alt, so you can keep holding the macro and tap Tab to cycle forward another window. 

I agree that the introductory example to press/release modes should be something simpler like holding shift while typing letters. We do need a good example for `&macro_pause_for_release` though. Can anyone come up with a better use case for that?

> The macro can then be bound in your keymap by referencing it by the label `&alt_tab`.

Author: Made this a simpler intro example.

### Bindings

> Like hold-taps, macros are created by composing other behaviors, and any of those behaviors can

Reviewer 2: Linking "hold-taps" to the hold-tap docs may be helpful.

Author: Linked.

> be added to the `bindings` list.

Reviewer 2: An example with some different types of behavior bindings could be helpful, e.g.

```
bindings
    = <&to 1>
    , <&bl BL_ON>
    , <&kp Z &kp M &kp K &kp EXCLAMATION>
    ;
```

Author: Updated.

> ### Wait Time

Reviewer 2: I think it would make more sense to describe `wait-time-ms` and `&macro_wait_time` in the same section (and the same for tap time). That way it would be easier to understand that `wait-time-ms` sets the initial value, and `&macro_wait_time` changes it in the middle of the macro.

Author: Combined them into one.

The wait time setting controls how long of a delay is introduced between activations of each behavior in the macro bindings sequence.
The default wait time is 100ms, but the value can be overridden by setting the `wait-ms` property on the macro, e.g.:

```
/ {
    behaviors {
        ab_macro: ab_macro {
			label = "AB_MAC";
			compatible = "zmk,behavior-macro";
			#binding-cells = <0>;
            wait-ms = <30>;
			bindings
				= <&kp A &kp B>
				;
		};

>     };

Reviewer 4: There is a mixture of tabs vs spaces for indentation here (and in the other code blocks in this file).

};
```

### Tap Time

> The tap time setting controls how long of a delay is introduced between press and release of a tapped behavior in the macro bindings sequence.

Author: Agreed. Updated.

The default tap time is 100ms, but the value can be overridden by setting the `tap-ms` property on the macro, e.g.:

```
/ {
    behaviors {
        ab_macro: ab_macro {
			label = "AB_MAC";
			compatible = "zmk,behavior-macro";
			#binding-cells = <0>;
            tap-ms = <30>;
			bindings
				= <&kp A &kp B>
				;
		};
    };
};
```

## Macro Controls

There are a set of special macro controls that can be included in the `bindings` list to modify the
way the macro sequence is processed.

### Binding Activation Mode

Bindings in a macro sequence are activated differently, depending on the current "activation mode" of the macro.

Available modes:

> - Tap - The default mode; when in this mode, the macro processing will press, then release, each behavior the macro sequence. This mode is useful for

Author: Agreed, pushed tweaks to make this more consistent.

  basic keycode output to hosts, i.e. when activating a `&kp` behavior.
- Press - In this mode, the macro processing will only trigger a press on the behaviors in the macro sequence. This is useful for holding down modifiers for some duration of a macro, e.g. `&kp LALT`.
- Release - In this mode, the macro processing will only trigger a release on the behaviors in the macro sequence. This is useful for releasing modifiers previously pressed earlier in the macro sequence processing, e.g. `&kp LALT`.

To modify the activation mode, macro controls can be added at any point in the bindings sequence.

- `&macro_tap`
- `&macro_press`
- `&macro_release`

A concreate example, used to hold a modifier, tap multiple keys, then release the modifier, would look like:

```
bindings
    = <&macro_press &kp LSHFT>
    , <&macro_tap &kp Z &kp M &kp K>
    , <&macro_release &kp LSHFT>
    ;
```

### Processing Continuation on Release

> The macro sequence can be paused, so that only part of the sequence is processed when the macro is pressed, and the remainder is processed once

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The macro can be paused so that only part of the `bindings` list is processed when the macro is pressed, and the remainder is processed once
```

> the macro itself is released. When processing is resumed, the current activation mode, wait time, and tap times will be preserved and used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the macro itself is released.
```
Do we need this last sentence? Since it's all just one bindings list, I feel like it should be fairly obvious that the state carries over. Explicitly stating what carries over might make you wonder what state *doesn't* carry over.

Author: Removed.

To pause the sequence until release, use `&macro_pause_for_release`, e.g.:

```
/ {
    behaviors {
        alt_tab: alt_tab_macro {
			label = "ALT_TAB_MAC";
			compatible = "zmk,behavior-macro";
			#binding-cells = <0>;
			bindings
				= <&macro_press &kp LALT>
				, <&macro_tap>
				, <&kp TAB>
                , <&macro_pause_for_release>
				, <&macro_release &kp LSHFT>
				;
		};
    };

> };

Reviewer 4: In addition to my above comments, I think there's a lot going on in this example that isn't necessarily relevant? Could this example focus solely on the `&macro_pause_for_release`, similar to the others examples in this document? Something like this:

~~~suggestion
```
bindings
    = <&kp D &kp O &kp W &kp N>
    , <&macro_pause_for_release>
    , <&kp U &kp P>
    ;
```
~~~

Reviewer 2: Suggestion for a real-world use case for this:

```
bindings 
    = <&macro_press &mo 1 &kp LSHFT>
    , <&macro_wait_for_release>
    , <&macro_release &mo 1 &kp LSHFT>
    ;

Reviewer 4: I think that is a great suggestion for a real-world use case – and one that would possibly satisfy https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/issues/968.

Author: Yup, agreed that's a good example. Moved to this.

```

### Wait Time

The default wait time is 100ms, unless explicitly set by the `wait-ms` property on the macro. If you want to update the wait time at any
point in the middle of a macro sequence, use `&macro_wait_time`, e.g. `&macro_wait_time 30`. A full example:

```
bindings
    = <&kp W &kp A &kp I &kp T>
    , <&macro_wait_time 500>
    , <&kp I &kp T>
    ;
```

### Tap Time

The default tap time is 100ms, unless explicitly set by the `tap-ms` property on the macro. If you want to update the tap time at any
point in the middle of a macro sequence, use `&macro_tap_time`, e.g. `&macro_tap_time 30`. A full example:

```
bindings
    = <&kp W &kp A &kp I &kp T>
    , <&macro_tap_time 500>

>     , <&kp I &kp T>

Reviewer 4: I like this pattern of up/down, fast/slow, short/long. 👍

>     , <&kp I &kp T>

Author: Tweaked to use this approach in most of the examples.

---
title: Macro Behavior
sidebar_label: Macros
---

## Summary

> The macro behavior allows configuring a list of other behaviors to invoke
> when the macro is pressed, including support for completing part of the binding list
> once the macro is released.

Reviewer 4: Now that we've thorough documentation below, could this introduction be simplified? 

I think we already simplified the first half of this in previous revisions, but we still refer to "the binding list" in the second half and I'm not sure it's totally necessary. Something like the suggestion below is less for a new user to wrap their head around, whilst still hinting about the awesome release functionality (which is covered thoroughly later in the doc):

```suggestion
The macro behavior allows configuring a list of other behaviors to invoke
when the macro is pressed and/or released.
```

Author: Yeah, totally agree. Added the simplified version.

## Macro Definition

Each macro you want to use in your keymap gets defined first, then bound in your keymap.

A macro definition looks like:

```
/ {
    macros {

>         zed_em_kay: zmk_macro {
>             label = "ZMK_MAC";

Reviewer 4: Now that we have the C macro, we could make this example more consistent. 

Also, I personally like things repeating throughout the binding, name, and label. As a user, it's helpful for a copy/paste find/replace workflow.

```suggestion
        zed_em_kay: zed_em_kay {
            label = "ZMK_zed_em_kay";
```

Author: Yup. Good call. Fixed.

    , <&macro_pause_for_release>
    , <&macro_release &mo 1 &kp LSHFT>
    ;
```

### Wait Time

The wait time setting controls how long of a delay is introduced between behaviors in the `bindings` list. The initial wait time for a macro, 100ms by default, can
be set by assigning a value to the `wait-ms` property of the macro, e.g. `wait-ms = <20>;`. If you want to update the wait time at any
point in the macro bindings list, use `&macro_wait_time`, e.g. `&macro_wait_time 30`. A full example:

```
wait-ms = <10>;
bindings
    = <&kp F &kp A &kp S &kp T>
    , <&macro_wait_time 500>
    , <&kp S &kp L &kp O &kp W>
    ;
```

### Tap Time

The tap time setting controls how long a tapped behavior is held in the `bindings` list. The initial tap time for a macro, 100ms by default, can
be set by assigning a value to the `tap-ms` property of the macro, e.g. `tap-ms = <20>;`. If you want to update the tap time at any
point in a macro bindings list, use `&macro_tap_time`, e.g. `&macro_tap_time 30`. A full example:

```
bindings
    = <&macro_tap_time 10>
    , <&kp S &kp H &kp O &kp R &kp T>
    , <&macro_tap_time 500>
    , <&kp L &kp O &kp N &kp G>
    ;
```

> ## Common Patterns
> 

Reviewer 4: I think a brief introduction to this section is needed:

```suggestion
## Common Patterns

Below are some examples of how the Macros behavior can be used to achieve various different functionality. 
```

Author: Added a small intro, worded slightly differently.

### Layer Activation + More

Macros make it easy to combine a [layer behavior](/docs/behaviors/layers), e.g. `&mo` with another behavior at the same time.
Common examples are enabling one or more modifiers when the layer is active, or changing the RBG underglow color.

To achieve this, a combination of a 0ms wait time and splitting the press and release between a `&macro_pause_for_release` is used:

#### Layer + Modifier

```
wait-ms = <0>;
bindings
    = <&macro_press &mo 1 &kp LSHFT>
    , <&macro_pause_for_release>
    , <&macro_release &mo 1 &kp LSHFT>;
```

#### Layer + Underglow Color

> To trigged a different underglow when the macro is pressed, and when it is released, we use the macro "press" activation mode whenever triggering the `&rgb_ug` behavior:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To trigger a different underglow when the macro is pressed, and when it is released, we use the macro "press" activation mode whenever triggering the `&rgb_ug` behavior:
```

```
wait-ms = <0>;
bindings

>     = <&macro_press   &mo 1              &rgb_ug RGB_COLOR_HSB(128,100,100)>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    = <&macro_press &mo 1 &rgb_ug RGB_COLOR_HSB(128,100,100)>
```

I appreciate that things are aligned with the lines below, but when viewing the documentation on a mobile device, it looks like this line contains only `<&macro_press &mo 1` which might be confusing (this kind of alignment is also not consistent with the other examples).

---

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60922914/159685703-63be1183-dbbc-40f5-bcbd-589d9a95203d.png)

Author: Tweaked this to make it more legible on mobile. Great catch!

    , <&macro_pause_for_release>

>     , <&macro_release &mo 1 &macro_press &rgb_ug RGB_COLOR_HSB(300,100,50)>;

Reviewer 2: Is it okay to press &rgb_ug twice but never release it?

Reviewer 4: This is a good point that I think we should include in the documentation.

What is the expected outcome when a key is pressed within a macro but not released via `&macro_release`? Should the macro release any pressed keys upon completion regardless of whether `&macro_release` is used or not?

Reviewer 2: It could potentially be useful to define a macro that never releases a key and have a different macro that does release it, though having keys be pressed and never released in a macro is probably more likely to be accidental.

Reviewer 5: FYI: One of the good use cases for not releasing a key in macro is to keep is opening app switcher on Mac:
```c
ZMK_MACRO(
        app_switcher,
        wait-ms = <0>;
        tap-ms = <0>;
        bindings
            = <&macro_press &kp LGUI>
            , <&macro_tap &kp TAB>
            ;
    )
```
This opens  app switcher and keeps it open. With right programming of other keys, it would release GUI key i.e., on enter key.

```

### Keycode Sequences

The other common use case for macros is to sending sequences of keycodes to the connected host. Here, a wait and tap time of at least 30ms is recommended to
avoid having HID notifications grouped at the BLE protocol level and then processed out of order:

```
wait-ms = <40>;
tap-ms = <40>;
bindings
    = <&kp Z &kp M &kp K>
    , <&kp SPACE>
    , <&kp R &kp O &kp C &kp K &kp S>
    ;
```

### Unicode Sequences

Many operating systems allow a special sequence to input unicode characters, e.g. [Windows alt codes](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/office/insert-ascii-or-unicode-latin-based-symbols-and-characters-d13f58d3-7bcb-44a7-a4d5-972ee12e50e0). You can use macros to insert there automatically, e.g.:

```
wait-ms = <40>;
tap-ms = <40>;
bindings
    = <&macro_press   &kp LALT>

>     , <&marco_tap     &kp N0 &kp N1 &kp N6 &kp N3>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    , <&macro_tap     &kp N0 &kp N1 &kp N6 &kp N3>
```
Polo!

    , <&macro_release &kp LALT>
    ;
```

## Convenience C Macro

> To avoid repitition or possible typos when declaring a macro, a conenience _C_ macro, named `ZMK_MACRO(name, props)` can be used to simplify things:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid repetition or possible typos when declaring a macro, a conenience _C_ macro, named `ZMK_MACRO(name, props)` can be used to simplify things:
```

```
    ZMK_MACRO(my_macro,
        wait-ms = <20>;
        tap-ms = <40>;
        bindings = <&kp Z &kp M &kp K>;
    )
```

> The macro above would produce the following complete macro definition:

Reviewer 4: I think there could be some benefit in clarifying that the complete macro definition is not required, and that the complete macro definition will be produced only during compilation (meaning the user should not expect to see complete version). Something like this perhaps?

```suggestion
This can be used instead of a complete macro definition. During the firmware build process, the example above would produce the complete macro definition below:
```

```
    my_macro: my_macro {
        compatible = "zmk,behavior-macro";
        label = "ZMK_my_macro";
        #binding-cells = <0>;

>         waif-ms = <20>;

Reviewer: Should be `wait-ms = <20>;`.

Reviewer: Also: given the recommendation that `wait-ms` and `tap-ms` be at least 30, shouldn't this example (both here and in the above C macro, of course) follow those recommendations?

Author: Indeed. Fixed the typo, and adjusted the value. Thanks!

---
title: Macro Behavior
sidebar_label: Macros
---

## Summary

The macro behavior allows configuring a list of other behaviors to invoke
when the macro is pressed and/or released.

## Macro Definition

Each macro you want to use in your keymap gets defined first, then bound in your keymap.

A macro definition looks like:

```
/ {
    macros {
        zed_em_kay: zed_em_kay {

>             label = "ZM_zed_em_kay";

Reviewer 4: Typo?

```suggestion
            label = "ZMK_zed_em_kay";
```

Author: No, was going for the initials for Zmk Macro -> "Z.M." -> `ZM_`

Reviewer 4: Oh nice, I missed that 👍

Reviewer 4: > Which is in fact what the macro generates.

Does [this example](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/1166/files#diff-bb8c34fc4eb07da51cc48c0999057d683fed48c7c51997521ada620789efe88aR219) need changing at the end of the doc then? (`ZMK_my_macro`→`ZM_my_macro`)

```
    my_macro: my_macro {
        compatible = "zmk,behavior-macro";
        label = "ZMK_my_macro";
        #binding-cells = <0>;
        wait-ms = <30>;
        tap-ms = <40>;
        bindings = <&kp Z &kp M &kp K>;
    };
```

Author: Indeed. Fixed.
